and welcome back to a fresh episode of
the business growth show
i'm your host sam dunning co-owner over
at webchoiceuk.com and today i'm joined
by joe bert
joe is the owner over at worldspark
design and he's part of bristol books
it's a not-for-profit publishing company
offering high-quality publishing
services
and businesses and organizations in and
around the bristol area joe
a warm welcome to the show sir how's it
going hello sam
hello good to see you and thanks for
getting me on the show
no worries man so looking forward to
this one today this is going to be a bit
of a unique episode for us so we're
going to be
the focus today is all about why hard
work pays off
and we're going to be learning your
story joe probably for the next 30
minutes or so
talking about how you've kind of worked
way up the trials and tribulations
overcoming tough times and then sharing
some tips on
kind of how you've built up your own
sustainable business
so without much more rambling from my
side let's
let's crack on with um kind of learning
learning a bit more about you joe
and kind of um a bit more about your
story really if you could
kind of roll up roll with it sir of
course yeah thank you sam
yeah so um i think i just wanted to to
sort of
um tell a bit about my story really to
to people today really and um it's
not um totally unique but um
for me it's it's um it's defined
you know the route that i've taken to to
the workplace and
in my career is defined things for me
and and
and led to success really um so
sort of starting at starting out from
from um
right right at the beginning let's say
really um when i
when i was my first employment in fact
was uh was doing a paper round and um
i i literally every single day of the
week i started off with
a saturday and sunday paper round and
then and then literally
um sort of ramped it up to doing a paper
and every day of the week
and on top of that i was also doing a
job
sticking up skittles in the evenings um
sort of most most weeks i'd do you know
one night
sometimes two nights um
and that was you know i didn't it was i
guess it was my way of
of sort of making my way in life and
you know being self-sufficient i i
didn't
get sort of a handout from my family in
terms of like lavish pocket money
christmas presents things like that so i
i was much more
you know i really got a buzz out of just
you know earning the money myself and
that feeling that it gave you really so
that that's kind of where it started
really from a young age about school age
you know
you're talking about sort of 14 year old
um
and yeah that but i can definitely you
know trace things back
my sort of business ethic really to that
point but um
so so from there you know did a bit of
studying
um did a um high natural diploma in in
design and
media and then was finding it a bit
tricky i kind of moved that to bristol
and i thought right i really want to get
a job in design
and yeah it was
it was quite tough i i guess you know i
got
i i was educated and i thought right i'd
just stroll into the workplace but
but it didn't it didn't quite happen
like that um
you know i sent off a load of cvs didn't
get any response
and just felt a little bit kind of you
know being beaten back by it all really
at the time i was um i was working just
as a sales assistant in
a in a camping shop and um you know that
was what i was doing to make ends meet i
kind of moved up to bristol
and i you know needed to pay the bills
needed to pay the rent
and so i i was doing that just just
working
as a sales assistant every day of the
week apart
apart from weekends and then i managed
to get a
foot in the door with a publishing
company
doing graphic design for them um okay
now what i did was
um a bit unconventional
in in the sense of i didn't actually
get paid for the work that i did um i i
sort of
met the people who were looking to um
you know
who needed help at that time yeah and uh
they they sort of you know they said oh
great you know
good to meet you and you know hopefully
we can we can get some work for you
and you know a few months after i
thought i really
just really really want to get get some
work i really want to you know
just really feel like i want to break
through start my start my career
and i was fortunate enough um just to
strike upon a brain wave of working for
free from so i just
phoned him up said look i really want to
work for you guys
can i just do this for free and it and
it really paid off you know i got my
foot in the door there and
and well it worked it sort of built up
from there
i basically started to be on their books
as a self-employed
freelancer and then you know
that was probably about four or five
years after that
um i actually became a director of the
company got it
before we get into where you are now joe
let's let's look back a bit so
i mean the whole whole premise of
today's episode is kind of looking at
hard work and how that's going to help
you in business and then we'll kind of
share some of your tips as you've grown
your company over the years
um so you mentioned from a young age you
were kind of doing a
paper round you did you did sticking up
for skittles you're pretty much working
almost seven days a week in your spare
time it sounds like from
from your early teens so is is that
something i mean
relating this back to business is that
kind of mindset of
um because i guess there's two angles to
this some people have got the kind of
argument of
work hard and work smart i've i'm under
the angle of
at the same time if you don't do smart
work and you don't kind of push yourself
to make things happen then nothing's
gonna happen for you
um so do you think that's something
that's kind of ingrained
in people from an early age joe was it
more more the sense that you've gotta
go out and get it or what what's your
view on on that side of things
well i think it's to do with your
circumstances so
i i think i had a hunger from a young
age but i wanted to
you know i wanted to have say even if it
was like
a new bike or something like that that i
may not have been able to
have you know just through pocket money
or christmas presents or whatever
so i had that hunger to to want to earn
that money and i think
that's to do with your circumstances as
much as anything else
you know it's not necessarily to do of
your age um i mean who knows maybe it is
like an inherent thing but
i i think for me it was about at that
point in time that's really what i
wanted and that was my drive
yeah yeah yeah the the hunger for it i
mean
and i guess that can relate right to
kind of business now as well in terms of
setting
yourself targets and and knowing where
you want to get to
and and kind of putting in
massively i think you know i think
people they're not going to get you're
not going to get anywhere if you sit
back expecting things to come your way
you know i i think you have to be the
driving force if if you want to get
something you have to be a driving force
and it's it's not necessarily i don't
think it's necessarily
just about hard work in the sense of
like how many hours you put in
i think when you're younger and you
don't really have necessarily
you know opportunities in the same way
now as a business person but
when you're younger and starting out
it's it's you know how can you
earn more money well you put in more
hours you know there weren't
quite as many opportunities back then um
this is talking about pre-internet here
so but but yes it's not necessarily
about hours but it's just about hard
work
yeah all right so moving forward a bit
you you mentioned you you were kind of
keen to to get into this publishing
company you spoke to them
and they said they'd give you a shout
when some work came up so you thought
took the initiative of
did you say doing some some free work
and what was what happened next
yeah so did some free did some free work
for them and i just think
they just the guys who employed me at
the time
um really just saw that i was keen and
and you know if you're keen it gets you
a long way again you know
if people see but you want to be there
you want to be doing what you're doing
then they respond to that so um i think
that just
yeah that that did the trick really and
and
yeah i think so so from there basically
um things progressed more hours um
you know i could give more and more to
the business and and they could see that
and
and in the end that led to a
directorship in the company
yeah yeah yeah any any lessons learned
in terms of
kind of those years what was this what
was the time frame joe in terms of when
you first started to working yourself up
to direct the level and is there
anything
you kind of share with us that you can
learn on the way in terms of a business
front as
as that one yeah certainly i think so um
so this was uh the company that i used
to work at farragu jones it was called
publishing company yeah it was
it was a smallish company um probably
about
five six employees um on average
um sometimes a few more of that but
it was um what we
we were quite dynamic as a business
quite quite able to sort of
move with um the times in terms of what
we were doing and what we
what we could offer compared to some of
the bigger publishing companies at the
time
but what um the biggest sort of lesson i
really
got from that whole experience and so
this
i was employed as a director for about
four years at the end of working for the
company
um so maybe about eight years in total
employment
and the this
i think it was around 2012 but the
company
actually went into administration and
that was the best
in a way but i didn't think it at the
time but it was actually
probably the best thing that could have
happened um to me because
i learned so much from that experience
um we actually
we got ourselves into into trouble
because we we took on
a a job for a client who built up a very
big debt with us
right and unfortunately that that um
you know despite their promises they
they never came good on their debt
and and it was a real i mean at the time
it was really sad because
you know working for a company you you
um
you know you build real friendships with
the people you're working for
and from and and yeah it's always sad
when that
that kind of comes to an end really um
but but as i said i did learn a lot from
that because
it just taught me that you you always
need to
sort of trust the figures and and trust
um you know don't don't fall for sort of
empty promises really
i think we've all been there right up
perhaps not uh to that extent
but um we've certainly well i know us at
webchoice in the past we've
we've had customers that have perhaps
promised us kind of epic
large-scale projects and we thought oh
this is a juicy client and
they kind of say yep let's start this
we'll we'll pay a bit later like
we're sorting out our accounts or we pay
60 day invoices or whatever it may have
been
but then as as time goes on you're kind
of delivering on your end and you're
wondering how the payment's going to
come in
and i suppose it's sometimes it's easy
to fall for those especially when
perhaps you've got a customer that's
been good in the past or they've come
recommended or things like that
um yeah and it's easy to be
it's easy to be sort of lured in by by
good promises
isn't it so i think you know it's yeah
that's the lesson from that really yeah
yeah yeah so what
what would you what would you say was
was kind of a key learning from that joe
is it more to
kind of go for kind of smaller customers
that are willing to pay on time or is it
just making sure customers pay up front
or is it
yeah i think i think you certainly need
to follow you know it's all of those
all of those things really it's it's
it's following the basics
i think you just need to make sure that
you're not exposing yourself to risk
because
that risk you know it's it's people's
employment it's people's livelihoods
um you know it's not worth it it's
it no matter how good the potential
reward is there
don't just don't throw away the sort of
basics of business and and
be lured into it really yeah
yeah yeah and i must admit the other
thing as well is that i was a bit
inexperienced
as a director um and and i put my hand
up to that as well
you know i i didn't probably appreciate
the
the full risk that that we were taking
on as a business
and so you know since then i've i've
i've
you know um not not ever
you know underestimated that
yeah yeah i've been in a similar
situation actually when
not i don't think it was quite to the
extent of uh of your company but when
before i was at webchoice i was working
a marketing company
and basically the the owner wanted to
grow much faster than we
we physically could and at the time
because i wasn't really
a founder i wasn't a director of the
business i was just one of the main
sales guys i just kind of went along
with it and he
had all these kind of lavish plans to
buy an office that we didn't really need
employ for for sale staff before we
could really afford it
and essentially all the cash flow was on
the line so
when the sales guys didn't deliver two
or so months in
the the company of course crashed
because it had limited funds being a
startup
um i missed out on about
seven eight grand in wages and sales
commissions um which was a massive hit
at the time
but it was also a blessing in disguise i
mean there was a lot of learnings to
take away
um it kind of gave me a bit of a wake-up
call in terms of relying on on things
and
now running a company at web church like
you say you just keep your eye on
figures and
things that you wouldn't necessarily do
as an employee so much more because
you've got to manage all your outgoings
you've got to understand when customer
payments are coming in
you've got to understand what you're
you're paying your staff what you're
paying other things your accounts so
there's
a lot of things to keep the thing your
finger on the pulse on right
that's right that's right completely
so yeah it's a it's a it's some
sometimes those shocks are a good
learning curve because they kind of wake
you up to
to reality and what yeah i think i said
you know
i i i'm amazed in a way if anybody who
is new to business and you know is is
new to being a director of the company
i i'd be amazed if anybody wasn't you
know taken aback by
by some things like that you know it's
it's just natural
sometimes you just have to learn the
hard way really
yeah no that's it so moving forward
let's let's learn a bit more about kind
of wild spark and also your book company
um tell us a bit more about kind of the
starting of of those companies and
and how you managed to build those up
and any kind of tips you can share with
us on that front jay
yeah so i think after that experience i
i
in a way i was yeah i was quite
um conscious to to try and build
something that was sustainable
and that was low risk um right from
beginning
and so um i was lucky enough to
um start wild spark design which
um i started as a sole trader and it was
very much
just building on the relationships that
i
had with some of my previous clients
from from the publishing company i
worked at before
okay and i i built some great
connections there
and you know amazingly to this day um
you know you're talking about
sort of some some of the relationships
there that go back you know
20 years almost um so i've i've really
um you know i'm really grateful about
really
um so i i basically i i took those
they were the sort of foundations of my
business really
as well spark design those um
relationships
and then at the same time there were
people who
were looking for
people who i a couple of people who i
was working with at the time as well
um who were looking um to start a new
publishing company
um and actually my skills
um sort of very much aligned with their
skills as well
um and we kind of started it
really as almost like a hobby um but
i've surprised myself really with how
it's how it's gone since then
um i think we it you know it's kind of
strange we
in a way we didn't really have very big
ambitions for it but but it's just
yeah it has grown um more than we would
have expected
um but those are the two key
key things really that came out of um
you know my situation
was that um i was able to start these
two companies which
which sort of co-exist still today and
and
uh you know have been doing very well
for me
yeah that's good i mean in terms of your
so talking about your
main business world spot design would
you say that the crux of building that
up
is kind of relying on connections that
you've made
and kind of building off relationships
with existing customers was there any
kind of new business acquisition or was
it
mainly kind of nurturing those
relationships you already had
i must admit it's always been about
nurturing good relationships
i've had and yeah i i think you know
i i could i've been in a position before
where i thought
i could grow i could expand this
but i've been happy to kind of keep it
at the level that i've kept it at
um for a number of reasons i think
partly it's to do with um starting a
family and
you know having commitments outside of
work because i think that that can kind
of take a lot out of you as well
and that's something that i wanted to to
sort of focus on so
i think that that was part of it and
also just feeling like
you know i i kind of can take my foot
off the gas
and still be successful
and you know get what i want from from
work
without it sort of completely dominating
me
and and taking too much out of me so i
think that's
i would say you know that that kind of
um whereas i was earlier on in my career
i was kind of frantically kind of
filling in the hours and and working as
hard as i can
i think i have turned that round more in
in more recent years to just think well
actually
who's in charge here and what what do i
want to get out of work
and and you know i mean it's i still am
motivated by money
um i'm not gonna gonna lie i i really
love it when
you know if if there's a new commission
or a new pitch that we win
for new business i i really get a buzz
out of that
um so that that is still really
important but
but it's just it's not just all about
that for me now
yeah yeah yeah no that that certainly
resonates with me especially when
you've got a family so you've got a
you've got to kind of think about
balancing your time and
what your priorities are and running
because you can get stuck into running
your business can't you yeah
it's too true too true so
so like you said joe a lot of your
business has been nurturing existing
relationships have you got any advice
for people tuning in in terms of kind of
keeping clients happy
um making sure they're staying with you
for the long term and kind of working
those relationships
and making sure i guess you deliver for
them
yeah i think it's
i i've not really i'm a bit more old
school in the sense that
um i'd happily meet up with a client and
sit with them and and talk about stuff
i'd happily pick up the phone to them
and
and just you know just make sure that
they're happy and it's listening is a
real
you know great skill as well like just
listen to your client
and and see what they want and you know
they don't sometimes they they don't
want you to say things it's not
necessarily always
telling them what they want to hear um
you know i've got
an instance at the moment actually where
where on a project where
i'm um trying to say to the client look
actually i think you're where you're
going with this is is not not
right way and and you know here's a
different way of doing things
yeah um because
they you know i think in the long term
people will
trust you it's it's about building trust
i think it's that
it's the integrity of those
relationships that i think
you know pays off these long-term
relationships are really built on that
kind of
openness and integrity and and i always
you know try and tell people things
straight i i i don't
you know sugarcoat things for for people
yeah yeah no that makes sense yeah
i think to your point like always
agreeing with customers is
a bit of a bit of a bad move and kind of
giving you giving your two cents because
i guess
not everyone's gonna agree with you some
some customers that may annoy but at the
end
end of the day they might not be the
best kind of suited for you but if
you're
giving them what you feel is genuine and
helpful advice that you think is going
to help them in the long run
then it's better for you it's better for
them um
just makes sense right yeah i i
i agree i think there's
yeah it's just it's very easy just to
say yes yes yes
to to customers um but sometimes it's
not actually good for them
um and so i've had this a number of
times where you know people
come back and they sort of you know they
realize
only after sort of learning themselves
that you were right
on something and and actually i was glad
that i
you know stuck to my guns on something
at that point
yeah yeah cool well yeah moving forward
i mean there are
any other points in terms of um for
people that are perhaps tuning in
thinking
yeah i kind of want to steadily grow
this grama business or people that have
perhaps
recently started their own company um
any other insights that you could share
joe that are perhaps quite useful
whether it is kind of
when you first start like these uh these
should be your main priorities
and as you as you grow further these
these are the things that you should
really consider
well i i think i think a couple of
things
spring to mind for me is one is think
about
business in terms of like building
friendships
and you know it if you can
you know a lot of my customers are
people who i enjoy spending time with
and and like as people and so
i i think if you can see business
in that way is as a way to
um you know it's not just about sort of
extracting money out of people it it
it's it's a sort of two-way relationship
of respect really so
i think that's that's one thing about
these long-term relationships really
and the other thing from my experience
um having sort of started a a couple of
companies from the ashes of another
company really was that
you don't always need money um you know
i think so there were four of us that
started bristol books publishing company
and we probably put in about 500 pounds
each
and to get the company up and running
and
that was it really um we've just
what was good about that is that we
didn't have
sort of expensive overheads as a company
i think
sometimes it's sometimes it's easy to
sort of like
you know just spend money
and think that that's a way of solving a
problem but
but actually what we learned is that
you can things might not actually happen
in the first place
if you think that it's going to cost
you know 10 000 to set this up and run
this every year
or it might not happen you might not be
able to
even get the thing off the ground if you
look at it like that
um so you've got to think a bit longer
term sometimes on that and and
it's good you know always think of
ways money's not money's not not a thing
to be able to prohibit you from doing
something like this from setting up a
company or even expanding a company
you don't always need money what would
you say is more important jay
what money or as in it sounds like
you're alluding to kind of taking action
is more important
and making things happen um rather than
kind of like you say dithering or
thinking about it because you think like
for example to start this new business i
need 10 grand set aside because
i'm gonna this is my business plan and
to achieve it i need i don't know 10k
rather than just saying look this is
what i've got right now i've got these
partners that are willing to go on
go in with me let's see if we can let's
do something now make it happen if it
works great
if not this is our other plan exactly i
think it's great having plans i'm not
i'm not going to sort of rubbish plans
all together
um but i think if you looked at
everything from a planning perspective
nothing would ever happen
you know i i think you just sometimes
you've got to take the plunge
and you know if you if you want to make
things happen things will happen
i'm a you know and that's right from the
word go for me that's
always been how i've wanted to approach
things is that
things are not going to happen if you
just you know
expecting things to come your way you
know i
it's i often think how people
when they're looking for a new job or or
what to do in life
they're looking for a job description
you know i just think you need to write
your own one basically
i think if you want something make it
yours
awesome joe what a great way to end with
that
we'll um please do tell us more sir
about how we can learn from you
and how people can connect with you in
the best way if anyone wants to get in
touch
yeah so so my two companies bristol
books
bristolbooks.org and wildsparkdesign.com
um i've also got the linkedin profile
so they're probably the best ways to get
in touch really
um but yeah i think that's that's it
really
nice one man well enjoyed the show and
if you want to learn more about
joe or get in touch with this company
we'll put all the links over on the site
businessgrowth.marketing
and with that thanks very much for
coming on the show joe really enjoyed it
thanks very much sam and great work
really really appreciative of what
you're doing
no worries dude and if you enjoyed the
show be sure to hit subscribe wherever
the heck you get your podcast from we
interview business leaders every week to
share actual tips across marketing and
sales to grow your business
and with that we'll catch you on the
next episode